---
sort: 1
---

# Astrometry

#### Definition: 

## Background

Telescopes changed how we understand the sky. Before telescopes, stars were located by eye and their locations were documented in star charts. These charts took many forms, from large scrolls to tightly bound books. They were very delicate and usually very expensive.

Once telescopes were invented, we realized there were so many more stars in the sky than we ever could have imagined. Astronomers began keeping even more detailed charts and books. Many of these are still in use today!

## Questions

- There are so many stars! Do we have names for all of them?
- How do we locate a star in the sky? Once we find it, how do we write down its location?

## Takeaway

It turns out we do have names for all the stars we can see. For centuries, astronomers have been naming and organizing stars in the sky. Around 100 years ago, an intrepid group of women observed, catalogued, and analyzed hundreds of thousands of stars. Known as the Harvard Astronomers, they are responsible for documenting many of the stars we speak about today. We will talk about many of them later in this course!

**Catalogs**: Lists of stars are called catalogs. Along with the names of thousands of stars, catalogs will include other facts about a star, such as its location, brightness, and age. You can access dozens of catalogs online for free! [Simbad](http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/simbad/sim-basicIdent=m33&submit=SIMBAD+search), for example, is a free, online database where you can explore all sorts of astronomical objects far outside of our solar system. We will explore Simbad later in this course!

So how do we locate stars in the sky? Astronomers developed a system of coordinates for the sky similar to longitude and lattitude on Earth. The two coordinates are called Right Ascension and Declination, commonly abbreviated as RA and Dec. With a value for RA and a value for Dec, you can locate any object on the entire sky!

Astronomers used to use long printed out catalogs to organize all the stars. Now, computers have made that job much easier.

## Activity

In this activity, you will take this image of the sky, find its RA and Dec (its sky coordinates), and use those values to locate all of the
Astrometry.net

worldwidetelescope.com





